queries.adoc, before:

= Queries

== CASE:

[source,cypher]
----
WITH date('2018-08-07') - duration('P1Y') as yearAgo
MATCH (u:User)
 WHERE u.dateJoined IS NOT NULL
WITH u, 
CASE
    WHEN date(u.dateJoined) > yearAgo THEN 'new user'
    WHEN date(u.dateJoined) < yearAgo THEN 'longterm user'
    ELSE 'status unknown' END as userStatus
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined, userStatus LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[:SENDS]->(:Payment)-[:PAID_USING]->(a:Application)
WITH u, a, 
CASE a.name
    WHEN 'Venmo for iPhone' THEN 'iPhone'
    WHEN 'Venmo for Android' THEN 'Android'
    ELSE 'unknown' END as userPhoneType
 SET u.phoneType = userPhoneType
RETURN u.displayName, userPhoneType LIMIT 10;
----


== Temporals:

=== Truncate

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2018-07-26T16:05:30') as payDate
MATCH (u:User)
 WHERE u.dateJoined >= datetime.truncate('year',payDate)
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined LIMIT 10;
----


=== Format (APOC)

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 1623958200 as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.date.format(sessionEnd, "s", "yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss") as formattedString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 1623958200 as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.date.format(sessionEnd, "s", "yyyy-MM-dd") as formattedDateString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 1623958200 as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.date.toISO8601(sessionEnd,’s’) as converted;
----


=== Date strings

[source,cypher]
----
WITH '2021–06–17 19:00:00' as sessionStart
RETURN apoc.date.convertFormat(sessionStart,"yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss", 'iso_date_time') 
as formattedString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH '2021/06/17' as sessionDay
RETURN apoc.date.convertFormat(sessionDay,"yyyy-MM-dd",'iso_date') as formattedDateString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH '06/17/2021 19:00' as sessionDetails
RETURN apoc.temporal.toZonedTemporal(sessionDetails,'MM/dd/yyyy HH:mm') as formattedString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 'Thu Jun 17 19:30:00 -0600 2021' as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.temporal.toZonedTemporal(sessionEnd,'EEE LLL dd HH:mm:ss Z yyyy') as cypherDatetime;
----


=== Duration

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Payment)
WHERE p.dateComplete IS NULL
OR p.dateComplete > p.dateCreated + duration('P1D')
RETURN p.paymentId, p.status, p.dateCreated, p.dateComplete LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[:SENDS]->(p:Payment)
WITH u, p ORDER BY p.dateCreated
WITH u, collect(p.dateCreated) as payDates
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined, payDates[0], duration.between(u.dateJoined, payDates[0]) as firstUseTime
ORDER BY firstUseTime LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime(‘2021-06-17T12:00:00’) as nodesStart
RETURN duration.between(nodesStart, datetime()) as contentPresented;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[:SENDS]->(p:Payment)
WITH u, p ORDER BY p.dateCreated
WITH u, collect(p.dateCreated) as payDates
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined, payDates[0], duration.inMonths(u.dateJoined, payDates[0]).years as years, duration.inMonths(u.dateJoined, payDates[0]).monthsOfYear as months
ORDER BY years DESC, months DESC LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-06-17T12:00:00') as nodesStart
RETURN duration.inSeconds(nodesStart, datetime()).hours as hours, duration.inSeconds(nodesStart, datetime(')).minutesOfHour as minutes;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[r]-(p:Payment)
RETURN u.displayName, duration.inSeconds(u.dateJoined, p.dateCreated).minutes as firstActivityMin, duration.inSeconds(u.dateJoined, p.dateCreated).secondsOfMinute as firstActivitySec 
ORDER BY firstActivityMin, firstActivitySec LIMIT 20;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-06-19T00:00:00') as weekend
RETURN duration.inSeconds(datetime(), weekend).hours as timeTilWeekend;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-06-30T23:59:59') as eom
RETURN duration.inDays(datetime(), eom).weeks as weeks, duration.inDays(datetime(), eom).daysOfWeek as days;
----


=== APOC temporals

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-06-30T23:59:59') as eom
RETURN apoc.date.fields(apoc.temporal.format(eom, 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss'),'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss');
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime() as now
RETURN apoc.date.toYears(now.epochMillis), duration.inMonths(date('1970-01-01'), localDatetime(now)).years;
----


== Eager operator

=== Compare example #1

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
ON CREATE SET app.name = line.`app.name`, app.description = line.`app.description`, 
app.imageURL = line.`app.image_url`
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
 ON CREATE SET pay.audience = line.audience, pay.dateCreated = datetime(line.`payment.date_created`), pay.status = line.`payment.status`, 
 pay.note = line.`payment.note`, pay.action = line.`payment.action`, pay.type = line.type, 
 pay.dateComplete = CASE 
    WHEN coalesce(line.`payment.date_completed`,"") = "" THEN null 
    ELSE datetime(line.`payment.date_completed`) END
WITH line, app, pay
MERGE (pay)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app)
RETURN count(*);
----

[source,cypher]
----
//non-Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
 ON CREATE SET app.name = line.`app.name`, app.description = line.`app.description`, app.imageURL = line.`app.image_url`
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
 ON CREATE SET pay.audience = line.audience, pay.dateCreated = datetime(line.`payment.date_created`), pay.status = line.`payment.status`, 
 pay.note = line.`payment.note`, pay.action = line.`payment.action`, pay.type = line.type, 
 pay.dateComplete = CASE 
    WHEN coalesce(line.`payment.date_completed`,"") = "" THEN null 
    ELSE datetime(line.`payment.date_completed`) END
WITH line, app, pay
MERGE (pay)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app);
----

=== Compare example #2

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
WITH line, app, pay
MATCH (p:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
MERGE (p)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app);
----

[source,cypher]
----
//non-Eager
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
WITH line, app, pay
MERGE (pay)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app);
----

=== Compare example #3

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
WITH line, from
MATCH (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
MERGE (from)-[r:SENDS]->(pay)
RETURN count(*);
----

[source,cypher]
----
//non-Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
WITH line, from
MATCH (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
MERGE (from)-[r:SENDS]->(pay);
----

=== Compare example #4

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
WITH line
MATCH (u:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
 SET u.dateJoined = datetime(line.`payment.actor.date_joined`);
----

[source,cypher]
----
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`});

EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MATCH (u:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
 SET u.dateJoined = datetime(line.`payment.actor.date_joined`)
----

Commit message:

Add demo queries and add KCDC slidedeck to readme

queries.adoc, after:

= Queries

== CASE:

[source,cypher]
----
WITH date('2018-08-07') - duration('P1Y') as yearAgo
MATCH (u:User)
 WHERE u.dateJoined IS NOT NULL
WITH u, 
CASE
    WHEN date(u.dateJoined) > yearAgo THEN 'new user'
    WHEN date(u.dateJoined) < yearAgo THEN 'longterm user'
    ELSE 'status unknown' END as userStatus
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined, userStatus LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[:SENDS]->(:Payment)-[:PAID_USING]->(a:Application)
WITH u, a, 
CASE a.name
    WHEN 'Venmo for iPhone' THEN 'iPhone'
    WHEN 'Venmo for Android' THEN 'Android'
    ELSE 'unknown' END as userPhoneType
 SET u.phoneType = userPhoneType
RETURN u.displayName, userPhoneType LIMIT 10;
----


== Temporals:

=== Truncate

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2018-07-26T16:05:30') as payDate
MATCH (u:User)
 WHERE u.dateJoined >= datetime.truncate('year',payDate)
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined LIMIT 10;
----


=== Format (APOC)

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 1631889000 as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.date.format(sessionEnd, "s", "yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss") as formattedString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 1631889000 as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.date.format(sessionEnd, "s", "yyyy-MM-dd") as formattedDateString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 1631889000 as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.date.toISO8601(sessionEnd,’s’) as converted;
----


=== Date strings

[source,cypher]
----
WITH '2021–09–17 08:30:00' as sessionStart
RETURN apoc.date.convertFormat(sessionStart,"yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss", 'iso_date_time') 
as formattedString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH '2021/09/17' as sessionDay
RETURN apoc.date.convertFormat(sessionDay,"yyyy-MM-dd",'iso_date') as formattedDateString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH '09/17/2021 08:30' as sessionDetails
RETURN apoc.temporal.toZonedTemporal(sessionDetails,'MM/dd/yyyy HH:mm') as formattedString;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH 'Fri Sep 17 09:30:00 -0600 2021' as sessionEnd
RETURN apoc.temporal.toZonedTemporal(sessionEnd,'EEE LLL dd HH:mm:ss Z yyyy') as cypherDatetime;
----


=== Duration

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Payment)
WHERE p.dateComplete IS NULL
OR p.dateComplete > p.dateCreated + duration('P1D')
RETURN p.paymentId, p.status, p.dateCreated, p.dateComplete LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[:SENDS]->(p:Payment)
WITH u, p ORDER BY p.dateCreated
WITH u, collect(p.dateCreated) as payDates
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined, payDates[0], duration.between(u.dateJoined, payDates[0]) as firstUseTime
ORDER BY firstUseTime LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime(‘2021-09-17T07:30:00’) as kcdcStart
RETURN duration.between(kcdcStart, datetime()) as contentPresented;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[:SENDS]->(p:Payment)
WITH u, p ORDER BY p.dateCreated
WITH u, collect(p.dateCreated) as payDates
RETURN u.displayName, u.dateJoined, payDates[0], duration.inMonths(u.dateJoined, payDates[0]).years as years, duration.inMonths(u.dateJoined, payDates[0]).monthsOfYear as months
ORDER BY years DESC, months DESC LIMIT 10;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-09-17T08:30:00') as kcdcStart
RETURN duration.inSeconds(kcdcStart, datetime()).hours as hours, duration.inSeconds(kcdcStart, datetime()).minutesOfHour as minutes;
----

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User)-[r]-(p:Payment)
RETURN u.displayName, duration.inSeconds(u.dateJoined, p.dateCreated).minutes as firstActivityMin, duration.inSeconds(u.dateJoined, p.dateCreated).secondsOfMinute as firstActivitySec 
ORDER BY firstActivityMin, firstActivitySec LIMIT 20;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-09-18T00:00:00') as weekend
RETURN duration.inSeconds(datetime(), weekend).hours as timeTilWeekend;
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-09-30T23:59:59') as eom
RETURN duration.inDays(datetime(), eom).weeks as weeks, duration.inDays(datetime(), eom).daysOfWeek as days;
----


=== APOC temporals

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime('2021-09-30T23:59:59') as eom
RETURN apoc.date.fields(apoc.temporal.format(eom, 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss'),'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss');
----

[source,cypher]
----
WITH datetime() as now
RETURN apoc.date.toYears(now.epochMillis), duration.inMonths(date('1970-01-01'), localDatetime(now)).years;
----


== Eager operator

=== Compare example #1

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
ON CREATE SET app.name = line.`app.name`, app.description = line.`app.description`, 
app.imageURL = line.`app.image_url`
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
 ON CREATE SET pay.audience = line.audience, pay.dateCreated = datetime(line.`payment.date_created`), pay.status = line.`payment.status`, 
 pay.note = line.`payment.note`, pay.action = line.`payment.action`, pay.type = line.type, 
 pay.dateComplete = CASE 
    WHEN coalesce(line.`payment.date_completed`,"") = "" THEN null 
    ELSE datetime(line.`payment.date_completed`) END
WITH line, app, pay
MERGE (pay)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app)
RETURN count(*);
----

[source,cypher]
----
//non-Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
 ON CREATE SET app.name = line.`app.name`, app.description = line.`app.description`, app.imageURL = line.`app.image_url`
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
 ON CREATE SET pay.audience = line.audience, pay.dateCreated = datetime(line.`payment.date_created`), pay.status = line.`payment.status`, 
 pay.note = line.`payment.note`, pay.action = line.`payment.action`, pay.type = line.type, 
 pay.dateComplete = CASE 
    WHEN coalesce(line.`payment.date_completed`,"") = "" THEN null 
    ELSE datetime(line.`payment.date_completed`) END
WITH line, app, pay
MERGE (pay)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app);
----

=== Compare example #2

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
WITH line, app, pay
MATCH (p:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
MERGE (p)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app);
----

[source,cypher]
----
//non-Eager
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (app:Application {applicationId: line.`app.id`})
WITH line, app
MERGE (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
WITH line, app, pay
MERGE (pay)-[r2:PAID_USING]->(app);
----

=== Compare example #3

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
WITH line, from
MATCH (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
MERGE (from)-[r:SENDS]->(pay)
RETURN count(*);
----

[source,cypher]
----
//non-Eager
PROFILE
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
WITH line, from
MATCH (pay:Payment {paymentId: line.`payment.id`})
MERGE (from)-[r:SENDS]->(pay);
----

=== Compare example #4

[source,cypher]
----
//Eager
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
WITH line
MATCH (u:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
 SET u.dateJoined = datetime(line.`payment.actor.date_joined`);
----

[source,cypher]
----
EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MERGE (from:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`});

EXPLAIN
WITH 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JMHReif/nodes2021-aura-training/main/venmo_demo.csv' as file
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM file AS line
MATCH (u:User {userId: line.`payment.actor.id`})
 SET u.dateJoined = datetime(line.`payment.actor.date_joined`)
----
